*by Miriam Posner*

Lists of tools like this one invariably age poorly. For an
always-up-to-date, much more comprehensive list of useful digital tools,
see the excellent [DiRT (Digital Research Tools)
Directory](http://dirtdirectory.org/). However, we felt it might be
useful to our participants to have a snapshot of tools that could be
useful to art historians specifically. We’ve focused here on free,
off-the-shelf tools that don’t require programming knowledge and might
be particularly interesting to people who work with a lot of images.

Image Analysis Tools
--------------------

*Image analysis, particularly computerized image recognition, is still
fairly crude, but a number of tools do allow you to work with images as
data.*

[Image Plot, Image Montage, Image Slice, and Visual
Sense](http://lab.softwarestudies.com/p/software-for-digital-humanities.html):
Created by the Lev Manovich-led Software Studies Initiative, these tools
allow you to analyze many images at once. Image Plot arranges images on
axes according to user-defined parameters, Image Montage arrays tiny
thumbnails in a grid, Image Slice provides a “slice” view of an image
collection, and Visual Sense is an environment for exploring images as
plots, bar graphs, and arrays. The Software Studies Initiative has
provided fairly robust documentation. See how Manovich and his team have
used these tools in the
[Projects](http://lab.softwarestudies.com/p/research_14.html) section of
the Software Studies Initiative’s site.

[Image Quilts](http://imagequilts.com/)\
The brainchild of Edward Tufte, Image Quilts is a simple plugin for the
Chrome browser that arrays all the images on a given webpage in a grid.
Use it with, for example, a Google Image search for “happiness” to see
some of the most popular representations of the concept in a neat grid.
Great for teaching.

[TinEye](https://www.tineye.com/)\
Feed TinEye an image and it will scour the web for visually similar
images.

Mapping
-------

*There are more mapping tools than we can count, but these are some of
our current favorites.*

[Neatline](http://neatline.org/)\
Designed to work with the exhibit platform Omeka (see below), Neatline
is best for smaller mapping projects for which visual detail and the
element of time is important. You can draw polygons on the map and use
Neatline’s timeline feature to walk users through changes over time.
(You can also use Neatline to annotate an image.) One thing that’s
distinctive about Neatline is that every point on your map can be an
item from your Omeka collection. So, for example, if you have an Omeka
collection that contains works of art, you can automatically plot each
one, metadata and all, on your Neatline map. Neatline’s
[documentation](http://docs.neatline.org/) is the best source of
information about it.
[Example](http://ibnjubayr.lib.virginia.edu/view-exhibits).

[StoryMap](http://storymap.knightlab.com/)\
A mapping platform that’s designed to show how a particular event (like
the [Olympic
relay](http://storymap.knightlab.com/examples/sochi-2014-olympic-torch-relay.html))
or concept has unfolded over time. An easy-to-use interface walks the
user from point to point, and each map point can be enhanced with words
and pictures. Bonus:
[Gigapixel](http://storymap.knightlab.com/gigapixel.html), also a Knight
Lab project, allows you to do the same thing, but on a picture.
[Example](http://nps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapTour/index.html?appid=ed4298bcae2d48cc905a3491c16ca417&webmap=ea9fad7f1d6148a8bf5afc44c3662ae0).

[Google Maps Engine](https://mapsengine.google.com/map/)\
Go from spreadsheet to points on a map with this easy-to-use Google
tool.
[Example](https://mapsengine.google.com/map/embed?mid=zhuiTwVccKcw.kWvH6mZ0TfQI).

[Harvard WorldMap](http://worldmap.harvard.edu/)\
The benefit of WorldMap is that you can not only plot your own points;
you can also combine them with layers that display other information —
for example, population numbers or demographics. It’s a way to see how
the points you’re interested in correlate with other geographical
information. [Example](http://worldmap.harvard.edu/digitalJC/).

[Esri Story Maps](http://storymaps.arcgis.com/en/)\
Confusingly, this is different from StoryMap. Story Maps are great for
things like tours or travel narratives. It’s easy to create map points
that incorporate images and text, and you can switch among many
different templates. Each point has to be plotted individually, though,
so it’s not great if you have a huge amount of data.
[Example](http://story.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapTour/?appid=d5b2c90d8a53466f9c3efb0f25d13325).

[CartoDB](http://cartodb.com/)\
This is a pretty easy-to-use mapping platform that also has some
advanced features. Uploading a spreadsheet of data is easy (CartoDB can
grab latitudes and longitudes for you if you don’t already have them),
and mapping data is a matter of a few clicks. CartoDB maps tend to look
really nice, and you can custom-style them if you know CSS. But a
heads-up that CartoDB only lets you work with 50 MB of data for free;
after that, you have to pay. CartoDB’s
[documentation](http://cartodb.com/docs) is excellent.
[Example.](http://www.afdc.energy.gov/locator/stations/)

Exhibit Platforms
-----------------

*If you have a collection of sources, you might want a way to show them
off. Here are a couple of platforms designed specifically for organizing
collections and arranging them into stories.*

[Omeka](http://omeka.org/)\
You can use Omeka to create collections and exhibits of
[stamps](http://blacksonstamp.omeka.net/), [artifacts related to a
historical
event](http://scarc.library.oregonstate.edu/omeka/exhibits/show/atomic),
or [artists’
books](http://marbl-omeka.library.emory.edu/marbl/exhibits/show/artistsbooksshowcase).
The real strength of Omeka is its metadata (the information you enter
about each item in your exhibit). It uses a standard called Dublin Core
that makes collections compatible with one other. It has a lot of cool
plugins so that you can do things like allow people to [contribute items
to your archive](http://omeka.org/codex/Plugins/Contribution). You
should be aware that there are two “kinds” of Omeka:
[omeka.org](http://omeka.org/), which you install on your own server;
and [omeka.net](http://www.omeka.net/), which is hosted for you. Some
people like the former because you can customize it more heavily, but
omeka.net is perfectly fine for getting started. My favorite Omeka
documentation is, of course, the [tutorial I
wrote](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/up-and-running-with-omeka)!

[Google Open Gallery](http://www.google.com/opengallery)\
This is a very new platform, so details are scarce, but it’s an exhibit
platform that appears to have some nice visual features, good search and
filtering capabilities, and a low learning curve. You have to request a
login; it took me about a week to get mine.
[Example](http://belgian-comic-strip-center.culturalspot.org/home).

Cleaning and Preparing Data
---------------------------

You can [do a fair amount with
Excel](http://schoolofdata.org/handbook/recipes/cleaning-data-with-spreadsheets/),
but much of this work can be accomplished more easily with
[OpenRefine](http://openrefine.org/).
[Here](http://www.meanboyfriend.com/overdue_ideas/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Introduction-to-OpenRefine-handout-CC-BY.pdf)
is a good OpenRefine tutorial.

See also: [Micki Kaufman’s workshop on cleaning and visualizing
data](http://www.mickikaufman.com/dfw-tools/) and [Data + Design: A
Simple Guide to Preparing and Visualizing
Information](https://infoactive.co/data-design).

Data Visualization Tools
------------------------

*“Data visualization” is hopelessly imprecise, since there are so many
different kinds of visualizations and mapping, of course, is a kind of
visualization, too. But here are some tools we turn to when we want to
start to make visual sense of a lot of data.*

[Excel](http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel/)\
Don’t count out this standby! If you’re looking to make pie charts, bar
graphs, and many other quick visualizations ([more complicated ones,
too](http://www.excelcharts.com/blog/)), you can often do it right from
your Excel spreadsheet.
[Here’s](http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel-help/charts-i-how-to-create-a-chart-RZ001105505.aspx)
a nice tutorial on creating charts and graphs with Excel.

[Tableau](https://www.tableau.com/new-features/9.0)

[Plot.ly](https://plot.ly/)

[Palladio](http://hdlab.stanford.edu/projects/palladio/)\
This is the new kid on the block, a project from Stanford’s Humanities +
Design Lab. As with ManyEyes, you can upload a dataset and visualize it
in a number of different ways. But the kinds of visualizations you can
do are somewhat more advanced: you can combine maps and timelines,
filter your data, make bimodal network graphs (ManyEyes only lets you do
1-mode), create relationships among tables, and download your data
model. This may be the tool to try if you find that ManyEyes can’t quite
handle what you want. Palladio is still new, so the documentation isn’t
as robust as one might like, but [this intro
video](http://hdlab.stanford.edu/lab-notebook/palladio/2014/06/20/full-video-tutorial/)
is very helpful. [Example](http://ricedh.github.io/01-palladio.html).

[ViewShare](http://viewshare.org/)\
Developed at the Library of Congress, ViewShare is a terrific, somewhat
underused (I think) tool that allows you to visualize a spreadsheet of
data in many different ways, including as a map. Its standout feature,
in my opinion, is its faceted browsing capability. You can drill down in
your data, much the way you drill down from “shoes” to “women’s shoes”
to “pumps” on Amazon.
[Example](http://viewshare.org/views/drevans/swag-diplomacy-black-travel-memoirs/).

Image Annotation
----------------

[ThingLink](https://www.thinglink.com/)\
This is a fun tool for linking different parts of images to videos,
images, webpages, or whatever you want. It’s easy to use and especially
nice for teaching.
[Example](https://www.thinglink.com/scene/500859588443111424).

[Neatline](http://neatline.org/)\
Designed for mapping, Neatline (described above) can also handle image
annotation.
[Example](http://bikinghistory.com/neatline/show/bf-goodrich-studio-components).

[Gigapixel](http://storymap.knightlab.com/gigapixel.html)\
Much like its sister platform, StoryMaps, GigaPixel makes it easy to
take a step-by-step tour of image annotations.
[Example](http://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/storymapjs/latest/embed/?url=https://www.googledrive.com/host/0B1d8oNIpMx53Wk9CdDlVZ01qU1E/published.json).

[Prezi](http://prezi.com/)\
Some people hate Prezi (I’ve heard people say it gives them vertigo),
but used responsibly, Prezi can be a useful, fun tool for presentations.
If PowerPoint is a film strip, Prezi is a blank canvas. Rather than
moving from slide to slide, you can hop around a canvas, zooming in or
panning out as the mood strikes. And you can embed Prezis anywhere,
making them quite useful for sharing information.
[Example](http://prezi.com/piwbxuqaih4f/world-cup-2014-must-watch-players-uk/).

3D
--

*Building a 3D model is time-consuming. UCLA’s own [Lisa
Snyder](https://idre.ucla.edu/people/profiles/lisa-snyder) has spent her
career building a [model of the 1893 Chicago World’s
Fair](http://www.ust.ucla.edu/ustweb/Projects/columbian_expo.htm). (It
is a really great model.) However, there are a few tools with lower
barriers to entry.*

[SketchUp](http://www.sketchup.com/)\
SketchUp is the generally recognized starter-kit for building a 3D
model. It’s relatively easy to use, but we find that people are often
surprised by how long it takes to build something with it. However, its
[documentation](http://www.sketchup.com/learn) is quite good.

[123D Catch](http://www.123dapp.com/catch)\
With SketchUp, you draw a model yourself. With 123D catch, you build a
model from photographs using a process called photogrammetry. It has an
app that you install on your phone, and once you’ve taken many shots of
the object you want to capture, 123D Catch will stitch those photos
together to make a 3D object. The results are pretty impressive.
[Example](http://www.123dapp.com/Catch/Canopic-jar-captured-by-Bradford-Lowery-cleaned-up/2553088)
(click on “3D View”).

[3D Warehouse](https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/index.html)\
Someone might have already made a 3D model for you! 3D Warehouse is a
collection of 3D models, some of them quite elaborate, like [this
one](https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com/model.html?id=71187c14aab1b33bdc0d3b8ac51c2a32)
of the Fisher Library at Penn.

[VSim](https://idre.ucla.edu/gis-visualization/vsim)\
We love VSim, AKA “PowerPoint for 3D models.” We’re biased because it
was developed by our own [Lisa
Snyder](https://idre.ucla.edu/people/profiles/lisa-snyder), but it
really does solve some problems with 3D models. A 3D model on its own
can be baffling to a viewer. And, especially when re-creating a
historical artifact, the modeler needs to convey to her viewers why she
made the decisions she did about its representation. VSim allows you to
take the viewer on a guided tour of a 3D model. Even better, sources and
documentation pop up in context as you move around the model, helping
you to understand, for example, why Lisa made the [Transportation
building](http://www.ust.ucla.edu/ustweb/Projects/Columbian_Expo/Trans4_612.htm)
that particular shade of red.
[Here’s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MYYtDTucKL8&feature=youtu.be) a
tour of VSim’s key features.
