Compiled by Francesca Albrezzi. See also the project lists compiled by
the Center for History and New Media at George Mason University: [Art
History Collections
(Highlights)](http://arthistory2014.doingdh.org/art-history-collections-highlights/)
and [Digital Art History Web
Highlights](http://arthistory2014.doingdh.org/digital-art-history-web-highlights/).

### Overviews

[The Digital Museum](http://thedigitalmuseum.tumblr.com/)\
*A blog presenting noteworthy digital projects in the cultural sector.*

### Visualizations and Analyses of Museum Data

[Patrick Murray-John, “Hacking on Cooper-Hewitt’s Data Release at
THATCamp, or, How to Get Me to Work for
Free”](http://hackingthehumanities.org/post/hacking-cooper-hewitts-data-release-thatcamp-or-how-get-me-work-free)\
*Discussion of an initial attempt to work with the Cooper-Hewitt’s open
dataset, including some of the complications and possibilities for
future projects.*

[Mensink et al., “The Rijksmuseum Challenge: Museum-Centered Visual
Recognition”](https://staff.fnwi.uva.nl/t.e.j.mensink/publications/mensink14icmr_poster.pdf)\
*Poster describing attempts to categorize the Rijksmuseum’s collection
of 112,039 photographs using computerized image-recognition.*

[“Mia Ridge Explores the Shape of Cooper-Hewitt Collections,” by Mia
Ridge](http://labs.cooperhewitt.org/2012/exploring-shape-collections-draft/)\
*Discussion of an attempt to work with the Cooper-Hewitt’s open data
using Open Refine and ManyEyes.*

[Color History of the Cooper-Hewitt
Collection](http://dataclimber.net/blog/2014/1/19/cooper-hewitts-collection-color-history)\
*Visualization of the colors found in the Cooper-Hewitt’s collection by
decade.*

[Brooklyn Museum API
Gallery](http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/api/docs/application_gallery)\
*List of applications created using the Brooklyn Museum’s API, including
the Reciprocal Research Network, which allows indigenous communities to
contribute knowledge about cultural heritage.*

[“Curatorial Poetry,” Cooper-Hewitt
Labs](http://labs.cooperhewitt.org/2013/curatorial-poetry/)\
*Tumblr blog that reproduces Cooper-Hewitt collection metadata as
poetry.*

[“The Changing Shape of Dutch Paintings in the National Gallery of Art,”
Matthew
Lincoln](http://matthewlincoln.net/2014/05/15/the-changing-shape-of-dutch-paintings-in-the-nga.html)\
*Visualizations of data about the National Gallery of Art’s collection
of Dutch paintings reveal the hands of different curators over time.*

[Visualizations created using the Tate Gallery’s collection
metadata](https://github.com/tategallery/collection)\
*After the Tate made its metadata freely available, a number of
developers created visualizations and interfaces with it. Some favorites
include the [metadata explorer](http://shardcore.org/tatedata/), [this
set of
visualizations](http://research.kraeutli.com/index.php/2013/11/the-tate-collection-on-github/),
and Oliver Keyes’s [Art as Data as
Art](http://blog.ironholds.org/art-as-data-as-art/) (which also has a
[Part II](http://blog.ironholds.org/art-as-data-as-art-part-ii/)).*

[Exploring Andean Pottery](http://www.mustardy.com/andeanpots/)\
*Created as a class project for a UCLA DH capstone class, this site
explores, augments, analyzes, and visualizes metadata about the Fowler
Museum’s [collection of ancient Andean
pottery](http://www.fowler.ucla.edu/collections/andean-ceramics).*

[Colour Lens, MetaLAB](http://colourlens.org/)\
*An interface for exploring works of art (from the Walker, the
Wolfsonian, and the Rijksmuseum) by color.*

### Noteworthy Catalogues and Interfaces to Collections

[Online Editions, National Gallery of
Art](http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/online-editions.html)\
*Collection images are presented in a book-like environment that allows
for side-by-side exploration, enhanced search, and the presentation of
peer-reviewed scholarship.*

[Digital Archive of Queensland
Architecture](http://qldarch.net/beta/?page_id=5#/)\
*Metadata for the collection is housed in an RDF triple-store database,
allowing users to [visualize
relationships](http://qldarch.net/beta/?page_id=5#/architect/relationships?architectId=aHR0cDovL3FsZGFyY2gubmV0L3JkZi8yMDEyLTEyL3Jlc291cmNlcy9wZW9wbGUvNDk%3D),
plot data on
[maps](http://qldarch.net/beta/?page_id=5#/ugc/map?id=aHR0cDovL3FsZGFyY2gubmV0L3VzZXJzL2NtY25hbWFyYTg3QGdtYWlsLmNvbS9Db21wb3VuZE9iamVjdCM2OTE3NTAxMzY0OQ%3D%3D)
and timelines, and create “compound objects” (outlines of research
trajectories). The Archive also makes its data available via an API.*

[Luce Foundation Center for American Art 2013
Hackathon](http://americanart.si.edu/luce/hack/)\
*A 2013 hackathon asked digital experts to reimagine the visual storage
space at the Luce Center.*

[MoMA Multimedia
Projects](http://www.moma.org/explore/multimedia/interactives/186/interactives-online-projects)\
*A set of interactive websites, most tied to particular MoMA exhibits,
including a catalogue of Louise Bourgeois prints and books and a site
that allows the user to create her own Andy Warhol screen test.*

[MoMA Projects](http://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/projects/)\
*A site that archives the work of close to 200 avante-garde artists.*

[SF MOMA
Artscope](http://www.sfmoma.org/projects/artscope/index.html#r=64)\
*Allows users to navigate the collection as an image grid, in which
collection objects can be clicked, dragged, and magnified.*

[The Online Scholarly Catalogue Initative
(OSCI)](https://www.getty.edu/foundation/initiatives/current/osci/index.html)\
*An initiative of the Getty Foundation, OSCI aims to transform museums’
scholarly catalogs for the digital age. Nine museums are currently part
of the consortium: the J. Paul Getty Museum, the Art Institute of
Chicago; the Arthur M. Sackler and Freer Gallery of Art; the Los Angeles
County Museum of Art; the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D. C.;
the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the Seattle Art Museum; Tate;
and the Walker Art Center. See, for example, the Walker Art Center’s*
[On
Performativity](http://www.walkerart.org/collections/publications/performativity)*.*

[The Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, The Metropolitan Museum of
Art](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/)\
*Numerous timelines tied to maps present works from the Met’s collection
in context.*

[One Met, Many Worlds, Metropolitan Museum of
Art](http://www.metmuseum.org/one-met-many-worlds/eng/details)\
*Collection highlights from the Met are presented via an interface that
unites elements of disparate images by conceptual keyword (like
“tailored” or “shimmering”) and allows users to present their own
pairings.*

[Smithsonian X3D](http://3d.si.edu/browser)\
*Smithsonian experts use cutting-edge 3D visualization techniques to
take visitors on guided tours of artifacts.*

### Artist and Audience Engagement Strategies

[Artists Respond, LACMA](http://www.lacma.org/artists-respond)\
*Artists respond to LACMA exhibitions.*

[Mark Bradford Project, Chicago Museum of Contemporary
Art](http://spotlight.macfound.org/studentspeak/entry/Chicago-Museum-of-Contemporary-Art-Sparks-Digital-Collaboration-Between/)\
*Artist Mark Bradford works with local teens to create digital art based
on mapping their own communities.*

[MoMA Art Lab iPad
App](http://www.moma.org/learn/kids_families/apps_websites)\
*iPad app designed to introduce children to modern art.*

[Art & Activity: Interactive Strategies for Engaging with
Art](https://www.coursera.org/course/artactivity)\
*MOOC (massive, open, online course) created by MoMA in partnership with
Coursera.*

[Story Board, SF
MOMA](http://www.sfmoma.org/about/research_projects/storyboard)\
*A site that allows users to aggregate social media channels related to
artist, institutions, and collectives in six cities.*

[SF MOMA Interactive
Features](http://www.sfmoma.org/explore/multimedia/interactive_features)\
*A set of websites tied to particular SF MOMA exhibits, many with
interactive elements.*

[Connections, Metropolitan Museum of
Art](http://www.metmuseum.org/connections/)\
*The Met’s staff members present multimedia commentary on broad themes
that draw from the Met’s collection (like “Clouds” or “Pilgrimage”).*

[82nd & 5th, Metropolitan Museum of
Art](http://82nd-and-fifth.metmuseum.org/)\
*Met curators each describe one work of transformative art in a video
enhanced by 360-degree rotatable images.*

[A Closer Look,
Louvre](http://musee.louvre.fr/oal/joconde/indexEN.html)\
*Rotate artworks, magnify them, and read scholarly analyses side-by-side
with the pieces.*

[Art Swipe, LACMA](http://www.lacma.org/artswipe)\
iPad app that allows patrons to create their own collages from LACMA’s
catalog.

### Other

[Steve](http://www.steve.museum/)\
*A social-tagging project that includes the collections of a number of
different institutions.*

[The Variable Media Initiative, Guggenheim
Museum](http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/conservation/conservation-projects/variable-media)\
*A nontraditional preservation strategy to preserve media-based and
performative works by defining the artwork independently from the
medium.*

[Ukiyo-E](http://ukiyo-e.org/)\
*This federated catalogue of Japanese woodblock prints can retrieve
visually similar prints and allows the user to identify similar prints
by uploading an image.*

 
