*by Miriam Posner*

*The world does not need another getting-started-in-DH guide! There’s
one
[here](http://dhresourcesforprojectbuilding.pbworks.com/w/page/69244275/Guides%20and%20Introductions),
and
[here](http://commons.gc.cuny.edu/wiki/index.php/The_CUNY_Digital_Humanities_Resource_Guide),
and
[here](http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/getting-started-in-digital-humanities-by-lisa-spiro/).
However! I do have my go-to set of resources when I really want to learn
a new technical skill. So here is a very opinionated, super-selective
list of resources that I regularly send people to.*

### Repositories of Projects

*Every single person who’s new to DH wants to know where the master
repository of projects is. Upon learning that there isn’t really one,
every single person who’s new to DH wants to build one. Resist! Effort
is currently coalescing around DHCommons (below), but the reason that
there isn’t a grand DH repository is that it’s extraordinarily difficult
to keep such a list current and comprehensive.*

[DHCommons](http://dhcommons.org/)\
The closest thing DH has to a registry of projects, DHCommons has
recently been “adopted” by CenterNet (an organization of DH centers) and
is branching out to include a journal with reviews of mid-state DH
projects. Project participants contribute their own project
descriptions, and people who are interested in working on DH projects
can volunteer.

[National Endowment for the Humanities Grants
Database](https://securegrants.neh.gov/publicquery/main.aspx)\
This is an invaluable repository of projects funded by the National
Endowment for the Humanities Office of Digital Humanities, including
things like timelines, budget narratives, and other useful pieces of
information. Restrict your search to the “Digital Humanities” division.

### Tool Directories

[Digital Research Tools (DiRT) Directory](http://dirtdirectory.org/)\
This is the best and most comprehensive list of DH tools. Because it’s
well-known and supported within the DH community, it’s generally up to
date.

[DH Toychest: Digital Humanities Resources for Project Building, Alan
Liu](http://dhresourcesforprojectbuilding.pbworks.com/w/page/69244243/FrontPage)\
An excellent list that includes the tools, tutorials, and resources that
Liu uses in his DH courses at UC Santa Barbara.

### General

[Lynda](http://www.lynda.com/)\
If your institution doesn’t subscribe to this library of videos, you’ll
have to pay \$25–\$37.50 a month. But it may be worth it — this is my
go-to way to learn a new skill. The list of topics is ridiculously
comprehensive, and the quality of instruction and production is
uniformly high (much better than you’ll get from YouTube videos). Some
people find watching videos tedious as compared to jumping around in a
book, but Lynda does do a nice job keying its transcripts to videos and
breaking up videos into three- to five-minute chunks.

[Programming Historian](http://programminghistorian.org/)\
I help out with this, so I’m biased. However, it is a very popular
collection of tutorials aimed specifically at humanities scholars. That
means the skills it teaches are things you’ll actually want to do, like
scrape the web for research data and format it into tables.

[“How Did They Make
That?”](http://miriamposner.com/blog/how-did-they-make-that/), by yours
truly\
I’m even more biased on this one, but I think it’s useful. It’s an
attempt to help DHers reverse-engineer digital projects to that they can
re-create them on their own. See also the
[video](http://miriamposner.com/blog/how-did-they-make-that-the-video/).

[Digital Humanities Questions &
Answers](http://digitalhumanities.org/answers/)\
A bulletin board where DHers new and expert stump each other with
questions. It’s OK to ask newbie questions here — it’s a very friendly
group.

[LibGuides Community](http://libguides.com/community.php)\
The downside of LibGuides, the reference guides your library probably
uses, is that they’re kind of weird looking and hard to navigate. The
upside is that you can search all the tutorials and reference guides
(all written by experts) at once from this site. It’s an amazing
resource that not that many people know about. Try searching, for
example, for “text analysis.”

### Data Visualization

[*Visualize This* and *Data Points*, both by Nathan
Yau](http://www.amazon.com/Nathan-Yau/e/B004S83IUE)\
We tend to like this book a lot at UCLA, partly because Yau is actually
a student in the Statistics department, but also because it’s just good:
a really nice mix of step-by-step instructions and more general insights
on dataviz.

[*Design for Information*, by Isabel
Mireilles](http://www.amazon.com/Design-Information-Introduction-Histories-Visualizations/dp/1592538061/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1405989340&sr=1-1&keywords=design+for+information)\
A nice overview of the many different kinds of information graphics,
with historical information and some very useful design principles.

### Database Design

[Designing Databases for Historical Research, by Mark
Merry](http://www.history.ac.uk/research-training/courses/designing-databases)\
Read this before you try to design a database for your research. The
registration process is very weird and annoying, but it’s worth it; this
is an excellent primer for the beginner.

### Network Analysis

[“Demystifying Networks,” by Scott
Weingart](http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?p=6279)\
If you can’t tell a node from an edge, start here. A plain-language
introduction to network analysis concepts and vocabulary, with lots of
pointers to other resources. See also the [course
packet](http://www.dhtraining.org/hilt/course/network-analysis-and-visualization/)
for Elijah Meeks’s Introduction to Network Analysis class at the
Humanities Intensive Learning and Teaching workshop.

### Omeka

Omeka Handouts

[Up-and-Running-with-Omeka](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty-2014/wp-content/uploads/Up-and-Running-with-Omeka.pdf)

[Omeka\_Exhibit\_Handout](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty-2014/wp-content/uploads/Omeka_Exhibit_Handout.pdf)

[Install plugins in Omeka, using your Reclaim Hosting
server](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gN4NYMEfDI3cvVZMCNgOViTwX2FTND93V1CNZPNuqPw/edit)

### Mapping

[The Geospatial Historian](http://geospatialhistorian.wordpress.com/)\
A sibling to The Programming Historian, The Geospatial Historian offers
a growing collection of well-edited step-by-step tutorials.

[“Journey to the open data jungle with OpenRefine, CartoDB, Leaflet and
Javascript,” Opensas
Blog](https://opensas.wordpress.com/2013/06/27/journey-to-the-open-data-jungle-with-openrefine-cartodb-leaflet-and-javascript/)\
I just happen to really like this tutorial, which I discovered by
accident, because it does a nice job of showing you how to go from raw,
messy data to spreadsheet to map and finally to web service.

### Project Management

[*Making Things Happen*, by Scott
Berkun](http://www.amazon.com/Making-Things-Happen-Mastering-Management/dp/0596517718)\
There is a lot of terrible writing on project management, and Berkun’s
book is one of the few I like. It’s designed for business professionals,
but its principles are generally applicable, and the book doesn’t insult
your intelligence.

[“Issues in Large Project Management,” by Lynne
Siemens](http://dhsi.org/content/2012Curriculum/12.ProjectPlanning.pdf)
(warning: giant PDF)\
Siemens’s class is legendary among DHers, and many of us are alumni of
the summer course she teaches at the Digital Humanities Summer
Institute. The course packet contains a wealth of useful information,
including sample project documentation.

[Tito Sierra’s presentations on project
management](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra)\
Sierra, a director of product management at EBSCO, has a terrific
collection of presentations on project management. They’re simple,
to-the-point, and immensely useful. See in particular [Project
Management
Basics](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra/project-management-basics) and
[The Project
One-Pager](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra/the-projectonepager).

[DevDH: Developing Digital Humanities Projects](http://devdh.org/)\
This site, the work of two experienced DH project managers, contains an
abundance of very useful lectures and presentations specific to DH
project development.

[Workflow for Planning a Digital Project, by Johanna
Drucker](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty-2014/wp-content/uploads/Johannas-Workflow-for-Digital-Projects.pdf)\
Prepared for this institute.
